---
layout: post
title: "Inflation of Communal Values"
date: 2017-05-25 19:28:15 +0200
comments: true
categories: essays
published: false
---

I recently discovered an old journal entry in which I wrote about my
observations of something I called at the time "the inflation of
communal values". I later discovered that there is a proper term for
this phenomenon in social science ("value signalling"), but I still prefer mine.

<!-- More -->

So what is the "inflation of communal values"? Let's say you and I are
both hunting enthusiasts. We are so enthusiastic about it, in fact, that
we spend all our free time reading about it, researching new
guns/gadgets, and learning from well-known thought leaders in the hunting community. Soon, we are members of "the community". Once we are in the community, the social animals that we are, we have some deep-seated needs, concisely articulated by Adam Smith:

> Man naturally desires, not only to be loved, but to be lovely; or to be that thing which is the natural and proper object of love. He naturally dreads, not only to be hated, but to be hateful; or to be that thing which is the natural and proper object of hatred.

In other words, members of a community seek prestige and high status in the eyes of other community members.

By definition, the members of any community have come together because
of a set of shared values. Naturally, the community members' attempt at
winning high status among their peers will be centred around these
values. However, we often don't win status by objective superiority – we
do so by proxies for objective superiority. To continue our example of
the hunting community, it is not necessarily the best hunter who will
have the highest status but the person who _signal_ attributes that
other members associate with being a good hunter. In the hunting
community, that might be a displayed desire for ever more powerful riles
or fancy gear. Naturally, there will be a core group of hunters who are
serious about their craft and resent those try to win prestige through a
proxy. However, as is often the case in social value signalling, proxies are easier to observe and cheaper to produce than the actual effect.

What happens if a few members in our hypothetical hunting community
successfully win prestige by showing their obsession for large rifles?
Well, soon other members will try to win prestige by showing their
obsession for even larger rifles. Once this trend gets started, no sane
social animal will espouse the benefits of smaller, less powerful
rifles. Doing so would be social suicide in the hunting community.

And that is the inflation of communal values. After a while, nobody
remembers anything about the actual utility of large rifles. They might
even be a hinderance to actually being good hunters. But for any
non-trivially sized community, most members will care more about their
prestige as judged by other members than they do about the actual
raison-d'être of the community ([more on that here](https://meaningness.com/geeks-mops-sociopaths)). The example of the hunting community is certainly contrived and simplified. In most real-life examples, you'll notice that there are many axes for signalling high-value status, but the inflation of communal values is easily observed in any sufficiently large community:

- In the community of Apple fans, it was unfashionable for a long time
to acknowledge _any_ positive attribute of Apple's competing products.
- Among hipsters, being contrarian is itself a signal for high value, no
matter how nonsensical this non-conformity might be.
- A feminist who postulates there might be explanations for the pay gap
beyond an oppressive patriarchy will likely find herself with few
feminist friends.
- Among social justice activists, ever-increasing sensitivity to ever
more-subtle slights is the currency of the day.

I used to consider this kind of phenomenon a mind-virus – a
vulnerability in our rational faculties. I have since learned that this
kind of "malfunction" is a feature, not a bug. For the most part, this
is rational behaviour for social animals whose reputation and prestige
status directly factors into their survival and reproduction value.
However, in situation where "truth" is more important than "utility",
this is a trap that we have to be very cognisant of.

Of course, it is the last two examples listed above (feminism, and the social justice movement) that are of particular importance today. Inflation of communal values takes place in every community, but it is particularly dangerous to society when the values being inflated involve judgements of morality. In that specific context, social scientists call the phenomenon "moral grandstanding".



Let's say you and I are
part of a martial arts club, and let's say, hypothetically, that this
martial art is aikido - a Japanese form of self-defence that's similar
to Judo in that it promises smaller practitioners overcoming larger
opponents by using their energy against them.

Now, as it turns out, learning aikido is pretty damn hard, but everyone
who practices it wants to be _seen_ as having learned it. This is the
first requirement for inflation:

- Members of a community seek prestige and high status in the eyes of
other community members.

In this community, some people will practice diligently and for many
years until they've mastered the art and by teaching and demonstrating
their master, they will earn prestige status, which at a deep,
psychological level is what we're all motivated by. However, the problem
with this approach is that it's obviously high-cost. It is far from the
most efficient way to gain prestige status. Those who seek a more
"efficient" approach might try to give the _appearance_ of having
mastered aikido

